# Getting and Cleaning Data Course Project Codebook

Following is a summary of the variables in the derived data set produced by 
the R program run_analysis.R accompanying this document.

## Units of measurement
All calculated variables are ultimately derived from signals generated by the 
smartphone's accelerometer and gyroscope. Accelerometer signals are denominated 
in the standard unit of gravity (g), defined as 9.80665 meters per second squared, or 9.80665 m/s^2. Gyroscope signals are denominated in radians per second squared (r/s^2).

## Vector space
Variables containing X, Y, or Z Axis refer to a 3-dimensional space with the 
origin of all three axes defined at the center of the phone. The phone is 
assumed to be upright and facing the observer. The X axis is horizontal and
parallel to the surface of the phone's screen. It is positive toward the right,
and negative toward the left. The Y axis is vertical, and is positive above and 
negative below the origin. The Z axis is horizontal and perpendicular to the 
phone screen; it is positive toward the front and negative toward the rear.

Time and Frequency Domains:
The signals are initially obtained by sampling over time (roughly 128 samples per second). These are deemed the time domain signals. To some of these, a Fast Fourier Transform is applied to transform time to frequency (wavenumber). These latter are deemed frequency domain signals.

## Component Terms in the Variable Names

### Gravity Acceleration

Accelerometer signals are assumed to be affected by gravity. By filtering the 
time domain signals, values for gravity and body acceleration fractions are 
separated.

### Body Acceleration

In the frequency domain, this refers to total body acceleration as obtained from 
the accelerometer. In the time domain, body acceleration refers to the component 
of the total after filtering to separate the gravity component.

### Jerk

Jerk is the change in the rate of acceleration, the derivative of acceleration with respect to time.

### -X, Y, Z Axis

Vector space axis ot the underlying signals.

### Magnitude

Measurement is standardized to the Euclidean norm.

### Mean and Standard Deviation

Arithmetic mean and standard deviation.

#### IMPORTANT

Please keep in mind that all variables in this data set are summarized as 
the arithmetic mean of the signals obtained for a given combination of subject, 
activity, and variable. Each of the summarized variables is either an 
arithmetic mean, a weighted average, or a standard deviation as shown in the
variable name. Therefore, the values in the set are the arithmetic means of a 
set of means, weighted averages, or standard deviations.

### Mean of Frequency

Original variable was a weighted average, not an arithmetic mean.

## Column Names

### Row Id Column Names

#### Subject
Integer from 1-30 denoting the human subject.

#### Activity
Text description of the activity underway at the time of capturing the summarized signals.

### Variable Column Names

To understand the meaning of each variable name, refer to the section above entitled 'Component Terms in the Variable Names'.

#### Frequency domain

Body Acceleration Jerk Magnitude Mean
Body Acceleration Jerk Magnitude Mean of Frequency
Body Acceleration Jerk Magnitude Standard Deviation
Body Acceleration Jerk Mean of Frequency-X Axis
Body Acceleration Jerk Mean of Frequency-Y Axis
Body Acceleration Jerk Mean of Frequency-Z Axis
Body Acceleration Jerk Mean-X Axis
Body Acceleration Jerk Mean-Y Axis
Body Acceleration Jerk Mean-Z Axis
Body Acceleration Jerk Standard Deviation-X Axis
Body Acceleration Jerk Standard Deviation-Y Axis
Body Acceleration Jerk Standard Deviation-Z Axis
Body Acceleration Magnitude Mean
Body Acceleration Magnitude Mean of Frequency
Body Acceleration Magnitude Standard Deviation
Body Acceleration Mean of Frequency-X Axis
Body Acceleration Mean of Frequency-Y Axis
Body Acceleration Mean of Frequency-Z Axis
Body Acceleration Mean-X Axis
Body Acceleration Mean-Y Axis
Body Acceleration Mean-Z Axis
Body Acceleration Standard Deviation-X Axis
Body Acceleration Standard Deviation-Y Axis
Body Acceleration Standard Deviation-Z Axis
Body Gyroscopic Jerk Magnitude Mean
Body Gyroscopic Jerk Magnitude Mean of Frequency
Body Gyroscopic Jerk Magnitude Standard Deviation
Body Gyroscopic Magnitude Mean
Body Gyroscopic Magnitude Mean of Frequency
Body Gyroscopic Magnitude Standard Deviation
Body Gyroscopic Mean of Frequency-X Axis
Body Gyroscopic Mean of Frequency-Y Axis
Body Gyroscopic Mean of Frequency-Z Axis
Body Gyroscopic Mean-X Axis
Body Gyroscopic Mean-Y Axis
Body Gyroscopic Mean-Z Axis
Body Gyroscopic Standard Deviation-X Axis
Body Gyroscopic Standard Deviation-Y Axis
Body Gyroscopic Standard Deviation-Z Axis

#### Time domain

Body Acceleration  Mean-X Axis
Body Acceleration  Mean-Y Axis
Body Acceleration  Mean-Z Axis
Body Acceleration  Standard Deviation-X Axis
Body Acceleration  Standard Deviation-Y Axis
Body Acceleration  Standard Deviation-Z Axis
Body Acceleration Jerk  Mean-X Axis
Body Acceleration Jerk  Mean-Y Axis
Body Acceleration Jerk  Mean-Z Axis
Body Acceleration Jerk  Standard Deviation-X Axis
Body Acceleration Jerk  Standard Deviation-Y Axis
Body Acceleration Jerk  Standard Deviation-Z Axis
Body Acceleration Jerk Magnitude  Mean
Body Acceleration Jerk Magnitude  Standard Deviation
Body Acceleration Magnitude  Mean
Body Acceleration Magnitude  Standard Deviation
Body Gyroscopic  Mean-X Axis
Body Gyroscopic  Mean-Y Axis
Body Gyroscopic  Mean-Z Axis
Body Gyroscopic  Standard Deviation-X Axis
Body Gyroscopic  Standard Deviation-Y Axis
Body Gyroscopic  Standard Deviation-Z Axis
Body Gyroscopic Jerk  Mean-X Axis
Body Gyroscopic Jerk  Mean-Y Axis
Body Gyroscopic Jerk  Mean-Z Axis
Body Gyroscopic Jerk  Standard Deviation-X Axis
Body Gyroscopic Jerk  Standard Deviation-Y Axis
Body Gyroscopic Jerk  Standard Deviation-Z Axis
Body Gyroscopic Jerk Magnitude  Mean
Body Gyroscopic Jerk Magnitude  Standard Deviation
Body Gyroscopic Magnitude  Mean
Body Gyroscopic Magnitude  Standard Deviation
Gravity Acceleration  Mean-X Axis
Gravity Acceleration  Mean-Y Axis
Gravity Acceleration  Mean-Z Axis
Gravity Acceleration  Standard Deviation-X Axis
Gravity Acceleration  Standard Deviation-Y Axis
Gravity Acceleration  Standard Deviation-Z Axis
Gravity Acceleration Magnitude  Mean
Gravity Acceleration Magnitude  Standard Deviation
